# AlphaDepDensity

This repository includes the data, codes, and results of the AlphaDepDensity project. The project investigates dependency density and AlphaDepDensity as metrics for assessing syntactic processing difficulty in self-paced reading (SPR) and MAZE tasks. The following is a detailed overview of the directory structure, along with the purpose of each folder.


## Structure

```
.
├── data/
│   ├── brown_spr/
│   ├── data_trad/
│   │   ├── MAZE_natstor
│   │   ├── SPR_brown
│   │   └── SPR_natstor
│   ├── naturalstories_RTS/
│   └── naturalstories_maze/
├── figures/
├── python/
├── r/
│   └── manual_check/
└── results/
```

## Folder Descriptions

### `data/`
It contains all raw data files used in the project.

- **`brown_spr/`**  
  It contains data related to the Brown SPR (Self-Paced Reading) dataset (Smith & Levy, 2013). The data can be accessed online at https://github.com/wilcoxeg/neural-networks-read-times.

- **`data_trad/`**  
  It contains datasets with tranditional predictors, i.e., frequency, word length, and surprisal (Shain et al., 2024). We used the datasets for comparison in experiments. The datasets can be assessed online at https://osf.io/6wvqe/files/osfstorage.

- **`naturalstories_RTS/`**  
  It contains self-paced reading data for the natural stories (Futrell et al., 2021), which can be assessed online at https://github.com/languageMIT/naturalstories.

- **`naturalstories_maze/`**  
  It contains reading time data for the MAZE task based on the Natural Stories corpus (Boyce & Levy, 2023), which can be assessed online at https://github.com/vboyce/amaze-natural-stories.

### `figures/`
  It contains all figures of the correlation analysis and GAM results.

### `python/`
  It contains Python scripts used for the calculation of dependency density and AlphaDepDensity based on the datasets ("00_brownspr_preprocessed.csv", "00_nsmaze_preprocessed.csv", "00_nsspr_preprocessed.csv") in the `results/` folder.

### `r/`
  It contains R scripts for data preprocessing and statistical analysis. 
- **`manual_check/`**  
  It contains data from the manual validation of the dependency density and AlphaDepDensity calculations.

### `results/`
  This folder contains CSV files generated by scripts in the `python/` and `r/` directories. Specifically, it includes the preprocessed datasets, AlphaDepDensity datasets, and datasets that combine AlphaDepDensity with traditional predictors.

## Usage

To use this repository:
1. Navigate to the `data/` folder to access raw datasets.
2. Use scripts in the `r/` folders to process data.
3. Use scripts in the `python/` folders to generate results.
4. Use scripts in the `r/` folders to conduct statistical analysis.
5. Review the `results/` and `figures/` folder for the final outputs or a summary of the statistics.

## References
Boyce, V., Futrell, R., & Levy, R. P. (2020). Maze made easy: Better and easier measurement of incremental processing difficulty. Journal of Memory and Language, 111, 104082. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2019.104082

Futrell, R., Gibson, E., Tily, H. J., Blank, I., Vishnevetsky, A., Piantadosi, S. T., & Fedorenko, E. (2021). The natural stories corpus: A reading-time corpus of English texts containing rare syntactic constructions. Language Resources and Evaluation, 55(1), 63–77. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10579-020-09503-7

Shain, C., Meister, C., Pimentel, T., Cotterell, R., & Levy, R. (2024). Large-scale evidence for logarithmic effects of word predictability on reading time. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(10), e2307876121. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2307876121

Smith, N. J., & Levy, R. (2013). The effect of word predictability on reading time is logarithmic. Cognition, 128(3), 302–319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.02.013
